# FoMaC

Epistasis describes the interaction among multiple genetic loci in their association with a trait such as gene expression (eQTL epistasis), and is emerging as a potential solution to the problem of missing heritability and as a tool for uncovering the structure of genetic pathways. Despite the abundance of methods designed to address the computational burden and reduced statistical power of genome-wide testing for epistasis, detecting epistasis remains difficult and replication of epistatic effects remains rare. The need for flexible meta-analyses also grows with the demands of big data only set to expand in the near future. We propose a novel method Fomac: F-test of magnitude and concordance which jointly tests multivariate linear regression epistasis parameters for significance and consistency to identify concordant epistatic effects across traits. By specifically constraining the form of epistatic effects to be consistent across traits, we gain increased statistical power to identify these effects in high noise regimes. Fomac can be applied to sets of coexpressed genes within one sample (dataset) to discover pleiotropy, or applied across multiple samples with similar characteristics to find examples where epistatic effects are consistent across conditions (replication). We demonstrate in simulations capturing the effects of different sample sizes, epistasis orders, and number of traits on relative method performance that Fomac outperforms several comparable methods for detecting epistasis. The Fomac test-statistic is also compatible with many of the top frameworks already available, meaning it can act as a standalone or complementary tool for detecting concordant eQTL epistasis.

This repository provides code for simulating genomic data containing epistatic effects, searching this data using FoMaC and legacy methods, and comparing performance among methods.
